Hello and welcome to the Harvest Baptist Church sermon podcast.
We are honored that you would click on this and listen to God's word preached by one of our elders.
At the same time, we strongly affirm the biblical mandate for Christians to be faithfully active and in-person part of their local church.
This sermon cannot and will not replace what a local church can provide to the life of a Christian.
That being said,
We hope that this sermon challenges and encourages you in your faith and that it builds upon the faithful ministry of your local church.
We hope that you enjoy.
God bless.
Take your bibles with me this morning and open to the book of Exodus.
Begin in Exodus chapter eight.
And by God's good grace, we will make it to the end of chapter 10.
You better boogie fast then, right?
I've came to this story of my life before, but I see fit to bring it back up.
It is a dark moment in my own life, but I will visit it for just a minute to make a point.
When I was senior in high school, I went on a senior trip.
Bad idea, parents never let your kids do that.
Okay, just for so you know.
But my grandfather was so kind to let me borrow his F-150.
He called her Goldilocks.
I think he's said since then.
One of his favorite trucks he's ever owned.
So me and my buddies, we had this truck and we really was a golf trip.
We were just playing a lot of golf.
not knowing we were doing, but we were in around Daytona Beach and it started raining one morning.
We were playing golf and so it rained us out.
So we were on our way back to the hotel and I was driving my grandfather's truck and loaded full of young men and golf clubs.
And I was coming on on back onto the highway off an exit ramp and a transfer truck was coming.
And I punched it to get in front of that transfer truck.
And what I did, I hit a big puddle and I hydroplane for about a hundred yards and missed the outside of the bridge, but managed to hit the inside of the bridge and hit it so hard, the motor of the truck literally just dropped out straight down.
And I remember that and of course, none of us had our seat belts on.
And so one of my friends that was with me is a preacher's son, and you know how preachers' kids can be.
And he said, now, listen, after we got out of the truck, we all lived, and we're getting ready.
Of course, the Florida State Patrol is on his way, and he said, we got to get our story straight.
What story?
We had to get our story straight.
He said, now, we got to tell the truth.
None of us had our seatbelts on.
I said,
Okay, that sounds good.
I mean, I just told him, my grandfather's truck, a seatbelt ticket is the last thing from my mind.
Okay.
And the state patrol comes up and he says, you know, my buddy at RA, give us the talk.
We're all going to confess we didn't have our seatbelts on when we were asked.
And he asked us, he said, now gentlemen, do you have your seatbelts on?
And my friend who had told us we're all going to be honest.
He goes, yes, sir, we ever one of us had our seatbelts on.
Wait a minute.
Well, I thought our stories weren't straight there.
Okay, we were a little confused.
However,
That being said, as a church, as Christians in general, we need to have our story straight.
Okay.
And by that, I mean, we need to be able to understand at basic level who our God is and what he is like and what he's done.
Now in these plagues, what we're going to see are motifs that are things that repeated throughout these plagues.
Okay.
We're going to look at three of them this morning.
There are three of these motifs and we're going to learn from these motifs.
I just want to give you this, the thesis, the claim that I'm dealing with this morning and we're going to break that claim down.
Our God, the God of the Bible divides between the righteous and the wicked based on confession and repentance.
And he pours his wrath out on the wicked.
Okay.
And repeat that.
And we will dive into that this morning.
God divides.
He distinguishes between the righteous and the wicked.
And we're going to have to ask some questions.
Who is the righteous and who are the wicked?
And he divides based on confession and repentance.
So then we have to ask, what is true repentance and what is the right confession?
And he pours his wrath out on the wicked.
We're going to ask the question, how does he pour his wrath out?
What does that look like?
Now, all three of those statements and questions are about as unpopular of a message in America today.
The message of exclusion is unpopular.
The Christian gospel is one of exclusion.
It is one that divides.
The judgment of God, the wrath of God is unpopular.
What is true repentance?
Everyone who claims to be a Christian
is in fact not.
We know that from scripture, right?
Everyone will not be in heaven though that is our heart and our desire.
Bible teaches us differently.
So let us dive in here.
If you would stand with me for the reading of God's word.
We're going to begin reading in Exodus chapter 10.
We're going to read one of these plagues.
plague of the locusts.
This is the eighth plague in Exodus chapter 10 verse one.
Then the Lord said to Moses, go into Pharaoh, for I have hardened his heart and the heart of his servants that I may show these signs of mine among them.
Now you may tell in the hearing of your son and of your grandson how I have dealt harshly with the Egyptians.
What signs I have done among them that you may know that I am the Lord.
So Moses and Aaron went into Pharaoh and said to him, thus says the Lord, the God of the Hebrews.
How long will you refuse to humble yourself before me?
Let my people go that they may serve me.
For if you refuse to let my people go, behold tomorrow I will bring locus into your country.
And they shall cover the face of the land so that no one can see the land.
And they shall eat what is left to you after the hell.
They shall eat every tree of yours that grows in the field.
They shall fill your house in the houses of all your servants and of all the Egyptians, as neither your fathers nor your grandfathers have seen.
From the day they came on earth to this day.
Then he turned and he went out from Pharaoh.
Pharaoh's servant said to him, how long shall this man be a snare to us?
Let the men go that they may serve the Lord their God.
Do you not yet understand that Egypt is ruined?
So Moses and Aaron were brought back to Pharaoh and he said to them, go serve the Lord your God.
But which ones are to go?
Moses said, we will go with our young and our old.
We will go with our sons and our daughters, with our flocks and our herds for we must hold a feast to the Lord.
But he, Pharaoh said to them,
The Lord be with you.
If ever I let you go, notice if I let you go, the men among you and serve the Lord.
Sorry.
If, uh, if I let you go and your little ones go, look, you have some evil purpose in mind.
No, go the men among you and serve the Lord for that is what you are asking.
And they were driven from the, they were driven out from Pharaoh's presence.
Then the Lord said to Moses, stretch out your hand over the land of the Egypt for the locus that they may come upon the land of Egypt and eat every plant in the land, all that the hell has left.
So Moses stretched out his staff over the land of Egypt.
And the Lord brought an East wind upon the land all the day and all the night.
When it was morning, the East wind had brought the locus.
The locus came up over the land of Egypt and settled on the whole country of Egypt.
Such a dense swarm of locus.
as had never been before, nor ever will be again.
They covered the face of the whole land so that the land was darkened.
They ate all the plants in the land and all the fruit of the trees and the hell that the hell had left.
That was the previous plague.
Not a green thing remained, neither tree nor plant of the field through all the land of Egypt.
Then Pharaoh hastily called Moses and Aaron and said, I have sin against the Lord your God and against you.
Notice what Pharaoh confessed right there.
Now therefore forgive my sin, please only this once and plead with the Lord your God only to remove this death from me.
So he went out from Pharaoh and pleaded with the Lord.
The Lord turned the wind into a very strong West wind, which lifted the locusts and drove them into the Red Sea.
Not a single locust was left in the country of Egypt, but the Lord hardened Pharaoh's heart and he did not let the people go out of Egypt.
Father,
Uh, thank you for the reading of your word.
Thank you for the giving of your word.
Father, would you speak to us?
Would you make your scripture clear to us?
Would you make yourself clear to us?
And may you edify your people and glorify your name.
We ask it in Christ's name and all God's people said, Hey man, maybe seated.
Now we have focused on a few characters in this narrative and one has been Moses.
And Moses has been growing with confidence.
Now notice this about Moses.
Moses, though he was growing in confidence, Moses would have looked like a failure to almost everybody in the world at that time.
He had been up to this point at the end of chapter 10, the plague of the night plague.
He had been nine times to Pharaoh and Pharaoh had still not let the Israelites leave Egypt to worship God.
So he seemed like a failure.
However, he had been faithful to God and he was growing in confidence
in Yahweh and in God's word, and he was standing bold on it.
And if you look at chapter eight, I draw your attention last time to this verse, chapter eight, verse 13, and the Lord did according to the word of Moses.
When Moses prayed for the frogs to leave that second plague, God made the frogs leave.
God obeyed Moses' word.
It is one thing to have authority with men, and that's wonderful and great.
To be able to stand and have respect of people and be able to be heard, that's wonderful.
but to speak to God and to be heard and for God to do according to your prayers, that's quite an amazing thing.
I would say there may not be anything more important in our influence in this world church, not only to have authority with men, but to have authority with God.
Now how do we do that?
Well, the Bible tells us in James the prayer of a righteous man availed much.
If our prayers are going to avail much, we have to know the word of God, confident in the word of God and grow in it, know who God is and obey him.
And we'll see God's will working out in and through our lives.
And so, but what did Moses know about God?
Well, remember, Moses is writing this account and Moses is making some things clear to us.
Now, we read this Locus account.
All right.
Now, there are 10 plagues altogether.
Now, the 10th plague, the plague of the firstborn son, that's a plague all to itself.
Okay.
It's the climax.
It's all to itself.
But the first nine, you can break up into three sets.
Okay.
and they get more severe, we're gonna talk about, they get worse and worse and worse, but the first plague of every set, Moses meets Pharaoh at the river.
He meets him at the Nile River where Pharaoh would have been worshiping that morning, something of that effect.
So he's meeting him there, the first one of every cycle.
In the second one, he meets Pharaoh in his chambers and where he was thrown, wherever that was, Moses goes there and warns about what's about to happen.
The plague gives him a chance to repent, let people go, let God's people go.
And if he does, God will relent.
He won't bring the plague, but we know God hards his heart.
The third plague in each set, it just happened.
There's no warning.
Moses doesn't go meet with Pharaoh.
They just happened.
So this is a cycle.
There's a pattern here and God is working and it's very clear that that, you know, no natural explanation apart from Yahweh, apart from God would make sense to these.
But what Moses is going to point out to us is a few things.
And the first thing is this, there is a division.
God makes a division between his people and those who are his people and those who are not between the righteous and the wicked.
In the chapter 10, let's look there again.
Did you notice something odd in verse two?
God says this to Pharaoh right up hard in his heart now in something just for your notes.
I want to encourage you go back and study these plagues.
We're not going to be able to dive into every one of them, but go back and study them and test what I'm saying to you.
There's a pattern to each of these plagues.
Okay.
And the pattern is God speaks to Moses and Moses goes and talks to Pharaoh.
Pharaoh may act like he's going to obey or not obey.
And then the plague happens and then Pharaoh,
He's not gonna let, or he doesn't repent.
He hardens his heart or God hardens his heart and he doesn't let his people go.
And that's always at the end of the plague.
But chapter 10, verse one, this eighth plague is different.
It starts off different, so it's highlighting something different for us.
That is Pharaoh's heart.
He tells us right off the bat in this plague, Pharaoh's heart is hardened in verse one.
But he says, this is one, verse two, that you may tell in the hearing of your sons and your grandsons how I have dealt harshly with the Egyptians.
Moses, I'm hardening Pharaoh's heart so you can tell your children about this and your grandparents
grandchildren about this, okay?
And notice next when he goes to Pharaoh, Pharaoh says, okay, you want to leave to worship your God?
Who's going?
He goes, well, our sons, our daughters, all of our children are younger, old.
He goes, well, you can take the older men, but that's it, leave the children here.
Leave our children with you.
Why is Moses bringing this out in this, okay?
There's something important about the children here.
And what is it?
It's this, God is not just redeeming Israel.
Okay.
He is doing that, but he's also defining Israel by redeeming them.
He has given them an identity.
You see, when you gather with your family for Christmas, when you gather together as your physical family, you are the stories that you tell and you are the stories that you refuse to tell.
And by telling stories of those who have gone, uh, who have died before you, your great grandparents, all of that, that gives your children a sense of identity.
Right.
There's there's nothing more sad.
I don't think in a family than when somebody really important in the family has died and people haven't grieved and they can't talk about that loved one to their family because they haven't grieved much and it hurts to talk about them.
But what you don't understand is your children and their children need to hear the stories because that gives them identity.
We as Americans even we are the stories as we as Americans tell or that we don't tell.
We, as a church, we are the stories that we tell.
God's people were not just God's people.
God redeeming his people and them telling that story, that was their identity.
God is not just redeeming a people.
He has given them an identity by redeeming that people, okay?
So being able to understand who they were was wrapped up in this redemption and it was for, it was for their children and that was important.
And we are the stories we choose to tell or not to tell.
And we need to tell the stories to our children.
Many of you moms have the great privilege, right?
Of being at home a lot of times with your children and many of you mothers work as well.
And dads, you're at home and work too, but what we need to understand as parents, we have been given the responsibility, we have been given eternal souls to disciple, right?
How does the church mainly grow by us winning our children to the Lord?
Right.
And so that is our first missionary field.
That is our most important missionary field.
And we, we have to share the gospel.
We have to live the gospel out in, in front of them.
Okay.
And so, and this is true.
This is what the church does.
This is part of, you see this in Old Testament and New Testament, true biblical church, children are a part of.
I won't go out on a limb here.
Children's church, you won't find it in the Bible.
It's anti-bible.
Okay.
Cause when God's people assemble the children assemble with them.
Old Testament and New Testament.
Deuteronomy chapter 31 verse 12, God instructs Moses.
When you read the law, when you assemble the people, gather the men, the women and the children.
Deuteronomy chapter 31 verse 12.
Ezra chapter 10 verse one, when Ezra brought the people together and they were going to confess their sins to the Lord and read the law.
Ezra chapter 10 verse one, confess your sin before the Lord and assemble the men, the women and the children.
Got to have them there.
If they're not there, you can't do it with them, right?
Ephesians chapter five, Paul says, teach your children to obey their parents, right?
And do this because this is a commandment that comes with the promise.
This is a commandment that comes with the promise you will live long in the land.
Well, what did Paul assume was going to happen when the church in Ephesus taught the children to obey their, they were going to be in the assembly.
They were going to be there, right?
This is biblical church when our children are there.
And this reminds us, this reminds us parents, this reminds us church members here at harvest.
When you, when you became a member here, you made a covenant to help disciple all the children of the members of this church.
Right?
And so what we need to ask ourselves as members of this church, not just elders and pastors, but as members here at harvest, do I know what's going on in all the children of this church?
Do I know what's going on in their lives?
Right?
Am I praying for those children?
Do I know what's going on in their lives?
And if you don't know what's going on in the lives of the children of this church, then you need to get that right, right?
Cause you committed to do that.
Let me give you a good way to do that.
There's directories here in the back of our church members.
Grab that directory, write prayer.
He said, well, I don't know the prayer requests.
Go talk to the parents.
Go talk.
Get to know them.
Pray for those children by name that they would come to know the Lord at an early age to understand the gospel.
Right?
I think the Lord here, I think something's wonderful about our church is the women, the older men and older women that pour into my children.
They get letters in the mail from people in our church.
And that excites my children more than you'll ever know.
That's what we're talking about.
That's what we're called to do as a church.
But do you know at least at surface level who they are and what's going on in their life?
Are you praying for them?
Because the church, it's our children.
We're committed to that.
And so when we assemble together, we assemble together with our children.
as well.
So what God is doing is God is creating a people, right?
God is dividing between the Egyptians and the Israelites, okay?
And let me show you this division even more.
And turn to chapter eight, verse 22.
In the second cycle, okay?
The first cycle we looked at how the magicians and the priests were being defeated by Yahweh in the gods of Egypt.
The second cycle plagues four through six and each one of these, there is a division that's made.
Now remember in Genesis, Pharaoh told Joseph that Joseph could take the Israelites and they could have the Gosha, the part of Gosha because the Egyptians didn't like shepherds and they could have that land, they could have that city in Egypt and they would be kind of separated.
And so what we see in chapter 8, starting in verse 22,
is this division, okay?
So look at verse 20.
We'll start there.
The Lord said to Moses, rise up and early and present yourself to Pharaoh as he goes out of the water.
Thus says the Lord, let my people go that they may serve me.
For else, if you will not let my people go behold, I will send swarms of flies on your servants and your people and to your houses and the houses of Egyptians shall be filled with swarms of flies on the ground in which they stand.
Notice verse 22.
But on that day, I will set apart the land of Goshen.
Now,
There's a lot of debate what kind of flies these are.
There's over 240,000 species of flies.
So nobody knows what kind of flies they were, something that were horse flies.
That would have been a bad day.
So there's just flies everywhere.
What is Satan calling the Bible?
He's referred to sometime as Beelzebub.
And that means what?
Lord of the flies.
This plague says, no, Satan's not even that.
He's not even Lord of the flies.
Yahweh is Lord of the flies.
That's a false name.
But here they're set apart.
Okay.
Let's, let's go down to the next plague, the plague of the livestock chapter nine.
All right.
Pharaoh is told that all the livestock in Egypt are going to be killed.
Looking chapter nine, verse three, the hand of the Lord will fall a very severe plague upon your livestock.
the horse, the donkey, the camel, the herds and flock.
Look at verse four, but the Lord will make a distinction between the livestock of Israel and the livestock of Egypt so that nothing at all that belongs to the people of the Lord shall die.
And the Lord said a time tomorrow, the Lord will do this thing in the land.
The next day the Lord did this thing.
All the livestock of the Egyptians died, but none of the livestock of the people of Israel died.
And Pharaoh said, and behold, not one of the livestock of Israel was dead, but then the heart of Pharaoh was hardening.
He did not let his people go.
So look at, let's look at the next plague, the seventh plague, the plague of hell.
God's going to bring hell upon Egypt.
Look at chapter 10, excuse me, chapter nine, verse 25.
Verse 25 chapter nine, the seventh plague, that hell struck down everything that was in the field in all the land of Egypt, both man and beast.
And the hell struck down every plan of the field.
It broke down every tree of the field.
Verse 26, only in the land of Goshen, where the people of Israel were, there was no hell.
God makes a division in all these plagues.
It falls on the Egyptians.
It doesn't fall on the Israelite.
What is God doing?
God's making a division.
And from the table of contents to the maps in the Bible, God divides.
Okay.
We need to understand the gospel of Christ divides.
Luke 12, Jesus said, did I, Jesus said, you think I would come to bring peace?
No, I come to bring a sword.
I come to bring, I tell you to bring division, father against son, daughter against mother, mother-in-law against,
I mean, I come to bring division in the family.
The gospel brings division and see what God was doing right here.
God is not just free in them.
So they will no longer be slaves.
Slaves can still worship God.
They could still be slaves in Egypt and worship God.
God's not doing that.
God is not just providing for them.
In other words, he didn't just kill the livestock of Egypt, the Egyptians and not Israel.
So Israel would have livestock and they didn't.
What do you think the Egyptians did when they saw all their livestock was dead?
Well, they went over to Goshen, got theirs.
You're our slaves.
That's not what God was doing.
God was making a division.
He was making exclusive people.
Here's what we need to understand.
God does not treat everyone equally.
Say that again.
Now, God does treat everyone on earth with some measure of grace.
God does treat everyone on earth with some measure of grace.
some former students here and the way that I think is a good example of this.
Because many times that we say this and you may catch yourself saying this in life, that's not fair.
You ever say that?
That's not fair.
And what are you saying when you say that?
I want justice.
We need to be very careful when we say that as Bible-believing people.
Because we don't want justice.
We do not want fair.
Let me give you an example of this.
I give essays or I don't have to give about three or four a semester per class, right?
That's what we do in language arts.
We read and we write.
And the way that I grade essays, I was told very early on that I needed to have my students value my feedback.
So what I do is I give them a grade.
If they turn in a rough draft, they get the first 50 points they can earn, which are these are test grades, they turn in the first draft.
I make edits or I make suggestions and then they can make edits and turn it back in and they can earn the next 50 points based on what they did with my feedback, the changes they made.
That makes sense?
But it never fails.
This is how it goes every semester I've done this.
There's a group of students that will not turn it in on the first time.
And if you don't turn it in, the very best you can do by my policy is a 50.
Even if you wrote a great essay and made 100 on it, because you didn't get my suggestions on the first draft, the best you can do is a 50.
What do I always do though?
Hey listen, do you understand the policy?
Yes, but I didn't turn, okay.
Now I'm gonna let it go this time.
Now here's what, here's your grade, okay?
You made let's say an 85.
I'm gonna make some edits and I'll let you turn it back in and you can earn 10 more points, okay?
So I give a little, okay?
Second essay comes along.
Same deal.
Same students.
Don't turn it in the first time.
And I don't want them to fail.
I don't.
So I say, you know, you should get a 50, but that'd be the best because you didn't turn in the first time.
I know, I know, Mr. Porter, I just had a lot going on.
Okay, okay.
Well, here's your grade.
I'll do it again.
I'll let you make some changes and give you a, you know, you can earn.
Okay.
Give you a little grace here.
Third essay comes along.
All right.
And same thing happens.
Same students.
Always a group of them.
But this time I say, you know what?
You didn't turn it in on the first time.
So this is a great paper.
But the best you could do is a 50, and that's what you got.
That's not fair, Mr. Porter.
Oh.
You won't fair?
Yeah.
Well, that first essay you turned in that I gave you, Grayson, that's a 50 now, too.
And the second one, that's a 50 now, too, if you won't fair.
Well, I didn't, no, you won't fair.
That's what we grown.
That's what you're going to get, right?
What is justice and what is fair in this world?
What was fair in justice was the flood when God flooded the world.
And actually that was grace cause he saved one family.
Justice was Noah, his family and all the other creatures of the earth die.
God's wrath, because that's what we deserve.
The consequence of seeing his death.
What was justice and fair was when Adam and Eve ate the apple, they dropped dead.
death.
That was justice.
That was fair, right?
Every day that God doesn't strike us dead in our sins.
That's just that.
That's grace.
God gives a measure of grace to everyone.
And we people don't want fair.
We don't.
People don't want that at all.
God gives a measure of grace and a nice instance of fire.
So the New Testament came before the church and lied to the church and God struck them dead.
That was justice.
That that was fair, right?
Every time you and I seen as Christians, we deserve to be taken home.
But he doesn't and that's grace.
Now there's something else when you God makes division.
God doesn't treat everyone equally.
And there's a lot.
Sometimes you see, you hear people say this on TV or even from a pulpit.
We are all God's children.
That's not, that's not true either.
We are not all God's children.
We may be all of God's creatures.
God is the creator of everyone, but it is not biblical or correct to say we are all God's children.
Now God as our creator does have a moral right to an obligation to, or we have an obligation to our creator to obey his commands, but we in Adam, right?
We are not sons and daughters of God.
When Jesus comes in John eight and Jesus begins to argue with the Pharisees and they, they say that Jesus is of the devil.
And Jesus says, no, um, Abraham new beam before Abraham was, I am, he says, I am of God, but you are after your father, the devil.
We're not all children of God.
In fact, we are born children of the devil.
We are born sons of perdition.
We are born in the ways of evil.
That's how we were born in evil.
John chapter one says he came to his own and his own received him not in verse 15, but those that received him that believe in his name, he gave the right to become children of God.
So it's Bobby Cummings coming to the Lord and receiving his name and believing on his name that we become children of God.
Everyone is not.
are not God's children.
Only God's people are God's children.
And how many of you know this, the story of Egypt?
Not all the people that God saved out of Egypt, he saved from hell.
Say that again, not all the people that God saved out of Egypt, did he save from hell.
The book of Hebrews is very clear.
There's people who brought out of Egypt that didn't make it to the Promised Land, didn't make it to the Promised Land at all, right?
All the people God saved from Egypt, he didn't save from hell.
That being said, we go through these plagues, he rethrew them.
Some of the Egyptians begin to think, Hey, look, every time Moses says this plague coming, this plague comes.
So this time he says it's going to hell.
We're all going to go inside.
Okay.
Moses said that all the livestock are going to die.
Some Egyptians say, I'm bringing my livestock in.
Okay.
If they're left in the field, Moses said they're going to die.
They begin to fear the Lord.
Some of them did.
You see, we live
in a society, a culture that has aspects of godliness to it.
It has remnants of godliness to it.
And that's better than a society that does it.
All right.
Um, so in other words, it's, it would have been better in Egypt to live among the Egyptians that, that brought their livestock in, right?
It had been better to be a slaves of the Egyptians who did hear the word of Moses and feared it.
All right.
In other words, it's better to live in a society that has remnants of godliness than the ones that don't.
right?
Because you don't want your neighbors just to be able to take your stuff, to be able to steal from you, right?
Or you want a nation that has some sense that the 10 commandments are moral and things to live by, right?
But not everybody in a godly culture or a culture that he'd somewhat of the words of God are Christians, right?
Welcome to Banks County, where over 80% of the people in this county say that they're Christians, yet you'll find less than 10% of them committed or a part of a local church.
Right.
But we're Christians and we know enough.
You ask them, what is the gospel?
Well, as long as my good works outweigh my bad works, God will accept me.
That's not even we're close to the gospel.
Right.
That's, that's actually the opposite of the gospel.
We live and you might say a godly culture here somewhat.
There are remnants of everyone's a Christian, but that doesn't mean everyone is a Christian.
Right.
It doesn't mean that at all.
So the, but the gospel judge is between that and we are to judge.
And you say, well, judgment, that's, you're not supposed to judge Matthew seven, judge not.
Well, that's not what the passage goes on to say.
Matthew seven says, judge not less you be judged because see Christianity is an exclusive religion.
The church cannot allow everyone in.
Let's say that again, the church is exclusive.
It cannot allow everyone in.
You see the church is for sinners and the church is not for all centers.
The church is for sinners who repent of their sin.
And the church is actually not for all sinners who repent of their sin.
The church is for sinners who repent of their sin and cling to Christ.
That that's who the church is for.
Okay.
The church is not open to everybody.
The, the, the entrance into being a member of the church is actually very small.
Right?
Have to admit and understand that you're a sinner and that, and you repent and turn from that sin and you cling to Christ and you rest in him for your forgiveness.
That is, and the church has to judge that and we are to judge that.
In fact, we're to judge that by people's lives and by their confession.
First Corinthians chapter five, there is a member of the church in Corinth who is living in open sexual sin.
And church in Corinth is doing nothing about it.
And Paul writes to them first Corinthians five and he doesn't condemn the man for that sin.
He says, I've already judged him.
He says, but I'm judging you now because you haven't judged him.
He's condemning the church in Corinth for not judging.
We as God's people, we have to judge.
And in fact, if you're a human, you judge that whole thing.
You can't judge people.
That's impossible.
We are created in God's image every person.
And what that means is God is a ruler.
God makes judgments and all people make judgments.
You can't live through life without judging.
Well, judge, not unless you be judge.
Well, if you, you criticize someone else for judging, you're judging that person for judging and you're standing on the side of the person, that person judge.
So you're making a judgment.
It's our nature to judge.
The question is, are we going to judge rightly or not?
Are we going to judge according to God's word or not?
That is the question.
We must judge.
And so what is the church then?
I bring that up.
What is the church?
How is the church supposed to judge?
Well, I just bring that up to say because God divides between the righteous and the wicked, who are the righteous?
Well, God's church is the righteous.
God's church are those righteous people.
And so we need to ask ourselves then, what is a church?
And as a church, we need to be clear on what is a church.
Let's note this.
Let's say what the church is not.
The church is not just a Bible study.
Bible studies are great, by the way.
You should study the Bible when you are a part of a church and come to church, but that's not what a church is, right?
You should come to church and have fellowship and be encouraged, right?
Charge the spiritual batteries, right?
You should come and rest.
All that's true, but that's not what the church is.
That should happen.
What is a church?
A church is a group of committed or covenant Christians who are committed together and judge God's doctrine
and judge God's people.
What is biblical doctrine and who are biblical people?
We judge, we are to be those, we are the assembly that does that.
We are God's people that does that.
Now, are you sure?
Well, here's what I can tell from scripture.
From Acts chapter two on God's plan for every believer, for every person is to be a part of a local church, right?
How do you know that?
Well, if you're gonna obey anything in the New Testament,
any letters of the New Testament, if you're going to obey them, all the commandments are in there, you must be a part of a church.
How else can you forgive one another?
How else can you be patient with one another?
How else can you be committed to one another?
If you're not a part of a body of Christians, right?
A Christian not being a member of a local church is a foreign concept to the Bible.
that to, to not be committed to a local church or endeavoring to be committed to a local church is in fact, as a Christian living in sin.
God has called his people not to live this Christian life alone.
Right.
He's given us a new Testament, old Testament, full of commandments, full of do this and don't do that.
And most of them revolve around how we live with other Christians.
Right.
Now, here, I say this, the church is God's missionary plan to and for the world.
The God's church is his missionary plan to the world.
Jesus says in John 13, 34, a new commandment I give you, love one another as I have loved you.
By this, people will know that you are my disciples.
The New Testament church is God's love on display.
The New Testament church
is the love of Christ on the cross seen amongst ourselves, right?
You wanna see God's love on the cross, you should be able to look at the local church.
How did Christ love us?
How does Christ loves us?
His love is unconditional.
His love is committed.
His love is self-sacrificial.
His love is covenantal to us.
Question.
Does your love for the church and for God's people reflect the love of Christ?
What your love and commitment to the local church, does it reflect the love that Christ has for his people?
If not, we're not obeying this new commandment to love one another as Christ has loved us in John 13.
So God makes a division.
God divides between the righteous and the wicked.
And who are the righteous?
They're God's people.
We're gonna talk about how they're made righteous, but God makes the divine.
We see that through these plagues.
Oh man, so many things we need to get to here.
Need to speak faster, Chris.
The second thing God divides between the righteous and the wicked by the measure of their confession.
Now in these, something, this second motif I want to point out to you quickly is how Pharaoh reacts.
Okay?
How Pharaoh reacts over and over again.
He hardens his heart.
God hardens his heart.
Look in chapter eight, verse 25.
Pharaoh called Moses and Aaron, go sacrifice your God within the land.
God had called God's people to leave the land to go into the wilderness to serve him.
And Pharaoh says he's going to negotiate.
No, you can stay here.
God says, take all the people, the children.
No, you can leave some of the men can go, but the women and children stay here.
No, there's no negotiating.
Pharaoh goes, okay, I obey God.
I'll go along with his commandments if there's an if statement in there.
Okay.
So God divides based on confession and repentance.
And then we're going to see that he does repent.
Look at the six plague.
Okay.
No, sorry.
Let's go back to chapter 10, the plague of the locusts, the plague of the locusts, chapter 10 and verse 16.
After the locusts come and after the hell and they, they just,
I mean, what did the people, what did the council of Pharaoh say?
They have destroyed Egypt.
There's nothing left.
Then Pharaoh hastily called Moses and Aaron and said, I have sinned against the Lord your God and against you.
Now therefore forgive my sin.
Please only this once and plead with the Lord your God only to remove this death from me.
All right.
And then go down to verse 20 after, after the locusts are removed,
verse 20, but the Lord hardened Pharaoh's heart and he did not let the people go.
This is repetitive.
You can see over and he negotiates with God.
God said, there is no negotiation.
You do what I say or the plague is coming.
The plague comes.
Pharaoh repents.
I send against God.
I shouldn't have done that.
And then he hardens his heart.
He will not let his people go.
There's bargaining.
And then there is this repentance.
But
He, you know, he makes a, you saw the confession here, but not all confession is possession.
Do we know that?
Not all confession of sin and following God is possession of true faith in God.
I mean, Pharaoh here is awakened to God, but he's not converted.
Growing belief is not necessarily growing faith.
Growing belief is not necessarily growing
faith.
How do you know that?
Well, James tells us that the demons believe and they shudder not only do the demons believe, but they fear God, but they do not believe in him.
Right?
Now, why do they fear God?
Because they've they've been along longer.
They've been around here longer than we have.
They know God's word comes true.
They know God's wrath is poured out.
They know that they fear him, but they do not believe.
Pharaoh believed God.
He even confessed his sin before God.
but it was not conversion.
You can have regret of sin, but that does not mean biblical repentance.
What was Pharaoh's repentance like?
Pharaoh's repentance was this.
I want these plagues to leave.
I want the pain to stop.
And I'll do anything for them to stop.
I'll say a prayer, I'll get in some water.
I'll do anything to make the pain go away.
And soon as the pain goes away, he hardens his heart.
friend, you and I need to examine our repentance.
If our conscious is pricked and we are convicted of sin, right?
And we repent of that sin only because we want that guilt to go away.
Or if we have some kind of pain, how many people say they come to the Lord because they have some kind of pain or plague in their life and they just want it to go away.
They'll sign the dotted line.
They'll say a prayer.
They'll get in the water as whatever will make the pain go away.
I'll do it.
I'll say a prayer to whoever, whatever, if that will make the pain go away.
That is not biblical repentance.
That's what Pharaoh did.
Pharaoh wanted the plagues to leave and then he hardened his heart.
Biblical repentance for sake sin because of love for God.
True repentance for sake sin because of love for God.
Romans two tells us it's the goodness of God that brings about repentance.
And friends, this is a solemn word in the Bible here.
In every plague, at the end of every plague, we see Pharaoh hardened his heart.
Here's what we need to understand.
When God's word is given, there's a day of grace given.
When God's word is given, a day of grace is opened.
But also a day of judgment is fixed.
Moses would tell Pharaoh, if you let God's people go, this plague will not come.
If you do not let them go, this will happen.
And it will happen tomorrow.
A day of judgment was fixed.
And what we see throughout this narrative, and you look at it, you read all of them, what we're gonna see at the end of chapter 11, Pharaoh's day of grace is closed.
Friend, that's a solemn thing.
I don't know if you've ever witnessed that happen in someone's life.
Someone whose heart was hardened to the Lord.
God's word was given to them, presented to them.
and their heart be hardened and you watch their day of grace close and the day of judgment come.
That is a solemn thing to watch.
But what are we supposed to do when we witness those things?
We are to continue to share the love of God, continue to share the gospel.
What did Jesus do to Judas who was the son of perdition?
He washed his feet.
He continued to give it.
It was not over for Judas till he died.
But here what we see this solemnness is that, and this is a warning to us when God's word has spoken to us, let us heat it for there's a day of grace open to us, but also know there's a day of judgment coming.
And that's what we see happen in the life of Pharaoh.
Third, God divides because between the righteous and the wicked based on confession and repentance.
What is true repentance?
True repentance for sakes, sin, not because you want the consequences to go away, but because you love God.
Pharaoh confessed his sin, turned from his sin, not because he loved God, because he wanted the consequences to go, based on confession and repentance.
And God pours his wrath upon the wicked.
What you literally see through these plagues is God, he reverses creation.
In Genesis chapter 2, there's this verse in chapter 2 verse 5 says that the land, after God formed the land, the brush hadn't come up, the vegetables hadn't come up, there was no food on the land.
And that's not a problem for God, that was a problem for man.
But God fixes it by producing this beautiful garden.
And man is to grow that garden so there will be food all over the earth.
So what happens throughout here?
The hail come, the locusts come, and the livestock die.
God is taking away the provisions of creation.
He's this famine, he's taken away.
He's taken away these creation provisions.
All right, and then what happens?
This last play, if you look at chapter 10, verse 20, this is the plague of darkness.
Verse 22, so Moses stretched out his hand toward heaven.
There was pitch darkness.
That word pitch just means darkness.
There was darkness, darkness, and all the land of Egypt for three days.
They did not see one another, nor did they rise from his place for three days.
But all the people of Israel had light that they lived.
Genesis chapter one, when God created the world, it was formless without void and it was darkness.
And God then the creation provision was light here.
He's D creating.
He's deconstructing Egypt.
He is crippling Egypt by taking away these creation provisions.
And what you see here is emptiness, chaos, dark darkness.
Friend, that is a picture of hell.
And there's a lesson here for Israel, not just Egypt.
And here's the lesson from Israel for the Israelites.
The question to the Jews here was not.
Who will save you from Pharaoh?
The question was, who will save you from Yahweh?
Because Yahweh is the great God you should fear.
And Jesus tells us that as well.
Jesus says, fear not the one who can kill the body, but fear the one who can destroy both body and soul in hell.
The picture that we have of eternal punishment, the second death is a picture of chaos, of darkness, eternal conscious punishment, where all the wicked
will be sentenced to death forever for all attorneys.
That's what the Bible and what do you have here?
You have a prelude.
You have a picture of what eternal hell will look like here in Exodus and God is bringing his judgment upon the wicked.
They deserve it.
That God is bringing his judgment upon them.
I think it's in the silver chair in Narnia.
I love this part where Jill, the little girl, she's going to a river
She's going to get a drink of water, and Aslan, the great lion, is protecting the river.
And she comes up and she says, are you the kind of lion that eats girls, eats little girls?
He says, eat little girls.
I eat kingdoms.
I eat peoples.
I eat worlds.
She goes, oh, better find another stream.
Aslan says, there is no other stream.
Who will save you from the wrath of God?
Only God can save you from the wrath of God.
That is what biblical salvation is, is God saving you from God.
You see, what happened on the cross?
Christ on the cross, Matthew tells us that darkness come over the land for three hours.
What was God signifying?
That Christ when he was on the cross, he entered the curse of God.
He entered hell on that cross, that hell that all people deserve.
What's the difference between the righteous and the wicked?
The righteous are those who put their faith in the one who already took the wrath that they deserve.
Our propitiation was one on the cross.
The consequence of our sins were paid when Christ went out.
Go back and look at the plague of hell.
Moses is asked to go pray to God and that the hell would stop.
Moses goes outside the city.
He stretches out his arms and he pleads to God and the hell stops.
That's what Christ does.
He enters in the darkness.
He is taken outside the city.
He stretches out his arm on the old rugged cross on that Roman cross and he prays to God, forgive them for they know, know what they do.
And it was there that God's wrath ceased for us.
And that is where our joy is in.
This morning we need to ask ourself, right?
Are we part of the righteous or the wicked?
Right.
There is a debt for our sin and we will either pay that debt or Christ paid that debt for us.
We need to ask ourselves how to, how, where is our love for the church?
How is that seen in our life?
Our repentance.
Is it true repentance or is it not true repentance based on our love for God and our hate for sin?
Or is it based on we just want the consequences to end any questions you have?
about church, about being committed to a church, about examining your own repentance, about coming to the Lord.
We'd love to talk to you about it.
There's a place in the bulletin, there's a card.
I'd love to talk to an elder or a mature Christian about any of those topics.
We'd love to pray for you, counsel you in any way, in that way.
Let us pray, Father.
Thank you for the opportunity to open your word, to look at your works, to look at your wonderful deeds, to see your wrath poured out.
And fathers, your people, we're glad we can say it was a glorious thing to see your wrath poured out on your son.
That's the wrath that we deserved.
And father, we now get to inherit what?
Christ your son deserves because he took our punishment for us and for that we rejoice this morning and our fellowship is based on that.
So Father, we come together to say thank you for your provisions that are in Christ.
Thank you for this people.
May we continue to grow and love for one another so people will know that we are your disciples.
We ask this in Christ's name.
Amen.
Thank you for listening to this sermon from Harvest Baptist Church.
For more information about the church, please visit our website harvestbc.church.
If you would like to contact us, please email us at contact.harvestbc.gmail.com or you can call us at 706-780-2211.
If you are looking for a church home or visiting the North Georgia area, we would love for you to join us on a Sunday morning.
9.30 in the fellowship hall for breakfast and Sunday school, and then at 11 a.m. for our Lord's Day worship service.
We hope that you have a great week.
God bless.